If you've ever painted a room or a house, you know that it takes a lot of work to color in those walls, and if you need to 
repaint it again, you've wasted a ton of work doing it the first time. This same concept of wasting effort to paint something can also attribute to performance problems in your applications. My name is Colt McAnlis, and at the intersection of performance and design lies a common performance problem-- overdraw. Overdraw is a term used to describe how many times a pixel on the screen has been redrawn in a single frame. For example, if we have a bunch of stacked UI cards, all the cards in the upper part of the stack closer to the user hide large portions of the cards hidden underneath, meaning that we'll need to spend time drawing those cards, which are mostly invisible. This is a large problem because each time we're rendering pixels that don't contribute to the final scene, we're effectively wasting GPU performance. And with modern layouts, it's easy to fall into a trap where we're stacking and layering views to give us beautiful design, but also creating this same problem. To maximize the performance of your application, you'll want to minimize overdraw. And thankfully, it's really easy to see the impact of overdraw on your applications right on the Android device. Simply go into Developer Mode and then turn on Show GPU Overdraw flag. Now, don't be alarmed while your phone turns into some sort of weird visual awesomeness. This is normal. What's occurring is that Android is now showing overdraw amounts on your screen through tinting pixels a different color. If you've only rendered a pixel one time, you should see it in its true color with no tint. However, as the overdraw increases, so do the colors. 1x overdraw, for example, is tinted blue, meaning that you've now redrawn this pixel one extra time. And of course, 2x, 3x, and 4x overdraw follow the same pattern. The goal of your application is to reduce as much overdraw as possible, which will move you from seeing lots of deep red down to seeing lots more blues. Now, while overdraw will organically come from just how your views overlap each other, a more common problem for folks to be aware of is lots of unneeded overlapping backgrounds, for example, having an activity background which gets overdrawn with a layout, which has a series of children who all have backgrounds. Don't forget the text boxes, and of course the titles, and those backgrounds as well, and of course, there's the avatar backgrounds and then the avatars themselves. You can quickly see how this can get out of hand. Doing something as simple as removing unneeded backgrounds can take your application from having a horde of angry red to a calming sea of blue, which is why you need to check out the rest of our Android Performance Patterns content for other ways to improve performance, and don't forget to join our Google+ community for more excellent info as well. So keep calm, profile your code, and always remember perf matters. [MUSIC PLAYING]